Resources Policy 86 (2023) 104248
Available online 10 October 2023
0301-4207/© 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Forecasting rare earth stock prices with machine learning 
Irene Henriques, Perry Sadorsky * 
Schulich School of Business, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, Ontario, M3J 1P3, Canada   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Machine learning 
Random forests 
Forecasting 
Rare earth elements 
A B S T R A C T   
Rare earth elements (REEs) are indispensable for producing green technologies and electronics. Demand for REEs 
in clean energy technologies in 2040 are projected to be three to seven times higher than today and will be 
critical to the clean technology transition needed to stave off catastrophic climate change. Forecasting rare earth 
stock prices is critical for making well informed investment decisions concerning this important asset class. 
Despite the latter, the literature on forecasting rare earth stock prices is scarce. We use machine learning 
techniques to forecast daily rare earth stock price direction. The analysis reveals that random forests, extremely 
randomized trees, RNN, and support vector machine have higher prediction accuracy than Lasso or Naïve Bayes. 
We find that the 10- to 20-day forecasts using random forests, extremely randomized trees, and support vector 
machine achieve prediction accuracies greater than 85% with some prediction accuracy reaching 90%. Lasso 
prediction accuracy is higher than Naïve Bayes but never greater than 67%. The MA200, MA50, on balance 
volume, VIX, and WAD are the most important predictive features of rare earth stock price direction. A switching 
portfolio that uses trading signals from an Extra Trees model impressively outperforms a buy and hold portfolio. 
Our results reveal the high prediction accuracy of using machine learning methods in forecasting rare earth stock 
price direction which should be useful to investors, policy makers and venture capitalists.   
1. Introduction 
The modern-day green technologies needed for the transition away 
from fossil fuels such as clean energy, semiconductors and batteries 
would not be viable without rare earths (Jyothi et al., 2020). So, what 
are some of the uses of rare earths? Rare earth elements (REEs) include 
Neodymium (Nd) – used in wind turbines, cell phones, computer hard 
drives and hybrid/electric vehicles; Samarium (Sm) – used in guidance 
systems and high-powered magnets; Cerium (Ce) – used in cell phones, 
rechargeable batteries, cameras; Scandium (Sc) – used in aluminum al­
loys and aerospace components; Yttrium (Y) – used in efficient light 
bulbs, and LCD and plasma screens; Europium (Eu) – used in LCD and 
plasma screens, and optical electronics; Terbium (Tb) – used in cordless 
power tools and guidance systems; Lanthanum (La) – used in catalytic 
converters, hybrid and electric-car batteries, and cameras; and Gado­
linium (Gd) – used in MRI contrast agents and cancer therapy (Henri­
ques and B¨ohm, 2022; Hsu, 2019; Kanazawa and Kamitani, 2006). The 
IEA (International Energy Agency, 2021, p. 50) has estimated that, 
relative to 2021, the demand for REEs in clean energy technologies 
(primarily for electric motor vehicles and wind turbines) in 2040 may be 
three to seven times higher and will be critical to the clean technology 
transition needed to stave off catastrophic climate change. 
Henriques and B¨ohm (2022) provide a historical analysis of the rare 
earth industry. From 1920 to 1949, the rare-earth industry began as a 
military race for rare earths, followed by the United States dominating, 
then losing the rare-earth market to China (1950–1990) and where from 
1990 to 2009 China’s dominance continued nearly unchallenged. 
Today, a worldwide clean-technology race for rare-earths propelled by 
countries accelerating their investments in clean energy systems and by 
the increased demand for electric cars, solar cells, wind turbines, and 
battery power all requiring various REEs has begun (Bo et al., 2019; 
International Energy Agency, 2021). To ensure a smooth energy tran­
sition to clean technologies, sufficient investment in diversifying rare 
earth suppliers and boosting supply chain market resilience and trans­
parency are critical (International Energy Agency, 2021). 
The International Energy Agency (2021) emphasizes the importance 
of government policy in increasing investment in rare earths. Govern­
ments seeking to increase investment in rare earths have an interest in 
rare earth stock prices for two main reasons. First, governments seeking 
to increase rare earth mining need leading indicators of the industry in 
order to craft their resources policy. Rare earth stock prices are a useful 
leading indicator of the rare earth industry. Rare earth stock price 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: ihenriques@schulich.yorku.ca (I. Henriques), psadorsky@schulich.yorku.ca (P. Sadorsky).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Resources Policy 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/resourpol 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2023.104248 
Received 1 August 2022; Received in revised form 2 May 2023; Accepted 1 October 2023   

Resources Policy 86 (2023) 104248
2
forecasts are an important component to government mining policy that 
determines mining royalty payments and licensing fees. 
Second, governments may also play an active role investing in rare 
earths through a Sovereign Wealth Fund (SWF). A SWF is a state-owned 
investment fund financed, in many cases, by natural resource rents. For 
example, in 2020 Angola’s SWF made an investment in Pensana Rare 
Earths to help develop their rare earths mining project.1 SWFs have 
specific rules of governance which are set up by their sponsoring gov­
ernment. For example, the risk and return profile of SWF investments 
may be determined by government policy. Setting and monitoring risk 
and return objectives require accurate forecasts of the underlying assets. 
Rare earths do not have traded futures. As an alternative, investing and 
risk management can be conducted using the stocks of companies 
engaged in the extraction and refining of rare earths.2 For example, a 
direct investment in rare earths cannot be hedged with futures but can 
be hedged with an investment in rare earth stocks. Forecasts of rare 
earth stock prices are crucial for understanding rare earth industry 
trends and the risk management of rare earth investments. 
The importance of rare earth stock price forecasting raises several 
questions. First, which methods produce the most accurate forecasts of 
rare earth stock prices? Second, how does forecast accuracy vary with 
the forecast horizon? Third, which features are most important for 
predicting rare earth stock prices? Fourth, how does a trading rule 
constructed from a machine learner compare with a buy and hold 
portfolio? 
To address these research questions, we use the following approach. 
First, we predict rare earth stock price direction. The reason for focusing 
on stock price direction instead of stock prices is because of the signif­
icance of market timing. Fund managers and investors are most drawn to 
the sign of asset prices as opposed to their actual value when making a 
tactical asset allocation decision (Pesaran and Timmermann, 2002). For 
example, portfolio managers may overweight assets that have a pre­
dicted positive trend and underweight or even short assets that have a 
negative predicted trend. Interestingly, research has demonstrated that 
asset price direction can be predicted with significant precision (Ballings 
et al., 2015; Basak et al., 2019; Leung et al., 2000; Lohrmann and 
Luukka, 2019; Nyberg, 2011; Nyberg and P¨onk¨a, 2016; P¨onk¨a, 2016). 
Second, we forecast rare earth stock prices using machine learning 
techniques. Machine learning methods/techniques are useful when the 
data are complex. As discussed in the first paragraph of the introduction, 
the demand for rare earths is driven by the automotive (electric vehi­
cles), clean energy, defense, health, and technology sectors. The supply 
of rare earths is heavily dominated by just a few countries (Henriques 
and B¨ohm, 2022; J. Wang et al., 2020a). Coupled with demand and 
supply conditions; supply chain disruptions (Xia et al., 2023), national 
security issues (Salim et al., 2022), and geopolitics (Shuai et al., 2023) 
create complex dynamics for rare earth prices and rare earth stock pri­
ces. The metal price forecasting literature has found that metal price 
dynamics are complex and high forecasting accuracy can be achieved 
using machine learning methods like decision trees and random forests 
(Díaz et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2021), support vector 
machine (Zhang et al., 2021), and neural networks (Khoshalan et al., 
2021; S´anchez Lasheras et al., 2015; Shi et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2021). 
Building on this literature, the machine learning methods employed in 
this paper include random forests, extremely randomized trees (Extra 
Trees), least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (Lasso), support 
vector machine (SVM), recurrent neural networks (RNNs), and Naïve 
Bayes. Random forests and extremely randomized trees are ensembles of 
decision trees. SVM partitions the data using separating hyperplanes. 
RNNs are a neural network that uses sequential pattern recognition 
between the nodes. Rather than relying on just one machine learning 
method, six methods are used. This provides a comparison between 
methods and adds an element of robustness to the analysis. 
Third, we include technical indicators and market volatility as fea­
tures in our analysis. The literature on predicting asset prices has 
identified the importance of technical indicators (Bustos and 
Pomares-Quimbaya, 2020; Neely et al., 2014; Y. Wang et al., 2020b; Yin 
et al., 2017; Yin and Yang, 2016) and stock price direction (Basak et al., 
2019; Sadorsky, 2021a, 2021b, 2022). Asset market volatility can affect 
asset prices and the decision to invest. Higher volatility is associated 
with higher uncertainty which can increase the cost of capital and create 
incentives to postpone investment. This lowers growth forecasts, ex­
pected profitability and equity returns. 
Fourth, we calculate multistep forecasts for one-day to twenty-days. 
A five-day forecast represents a week of trading days while a 10-day 
forecast represents two weeks of trading days. A 20-day forecast corre­
sponds to roughly one month of trading days. A multistep forecast ho­
rizon offers useful information on how prediction accuracy varies across 
different forecast horizons. 
Fifth, price direction forecasts are used to construct an equity port­
folio where an investment in rare earth stocks is made if the price di­
rection forecast is positive and no investment made otherwise. This 
switching portfolio is compared to a buy and hold portfolio. 
Several important findings emerge from our analysis. First, random 
forests, extremely randomized trees, and support vector machine have 
higher prediction accuracy than Lasso or Naïve Bayes. Random forests, 
extremely randomized trees, and support vector machine each have 
prediction accuracies greater than 85% for 10-day to 20-day forecasts. 
Second, Shapley feature importance indicates WAD, MA200, VIX, MA50 
and on balance volume are among the most important features for 5-day, 
10-day and 20-day forecast horizons. Of the non-technical indicators, 
VIX is, on average, the most important feature. Third, a switching 
portfolio that uses trading signals from an Extra Trees model out­
performs a buy and hold portfolio. 
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents 
some background literature. Section 3 describes our methodology. The 
data are examined in Section 4 while Section 5 presents our empirical 
results on forecast accuracy, feature importance and an equity portfolio 
comparison. A discussion of the results and conclusion are found in 
Sections 6 and 7 respectively. 
2. Background literature 
The existing literature has examined the impact of rare earth prices 
on clean energy stock prices, renewable energy prices or the relationship 
between rare earth stock prices and other asset prices. Baldi et al. (2014) 
use multifactor models to help understand the relationship between the 
prices of two rare earths (neodymium and dysprosium) on six clean 
energy stock prices indices. Rising prices of dysprosium and neodymium 
were found to have a negative impact on clean energy stock prices. 
Apergis and Apergis (2017) use cointegration techniques to investigate 
the relationship between rare earth prices and the consumption of 
renewable energy. They find a negative relationship between rare earth 
prices and renewable energy consumption both at the local and global 
levels. 
Fernandez (2017a) analyses selected rare earth prices and rare earth 
stock prices. Systematic risk (beta) varies across time and by market 
index. Rare earth stock price betas show considerable variation ranging 
between −1.0 and 4.0. Rare earth stock prices tend to track rare earth 
commodity prices closely but there is a low correlation between rare 
earth stock prices and the prices of other commodities. Chen et al. 
(2020) use multivariate GARCH (BEKK, DCC) to examine the volatility 
spillovers and dynamic correlations between international crude oil, 
new energy, and rare earth markets in China. They find high spillovers 
between new energy and rare earth markets. The rare earth market is 
found to be the main source of these spillovers. Reboredo and Ugolini 
1 https://www.reuters.com/article/pensana-rare-equity-angola-idAF 
L4N2GO0TR.  
2 Fernandez (2017a) finds that rare earth stock prices tend to track rare earth 
commodity prices closely. 
I. Henriques and P. Sadorsky                                                                                                                                                                                                                

Resources Policy 86 (2023) 104248
3
(2020) use Markov switching models and vector autoregression (VAR) 
to study the price transmission between global stock prices, rare earth 
stocks, base metal stocks, clean energy stocks, oil prices, and gold prices. 
In a low volatility regime, rare earth stocks prices are closely associated 
with base metal stock prices and weakly linked to gold, oil, clean energy 
and global stock prices. In a high volatility regime, however, there is 
considerable co-movement between rare earth stock prices and the other 
assets. Bouri et al. (2021) study the dynamic return and volatility rela­
tionship between rare earth stock prices and the stock prices of clean 
energy, health care equipment, telecommunications, consumer elec­
tronics, and aerospace and defense. They use quantile connectedness to 
investigate the tail dependence between these assets over the full sample 
period as well as the COVID-19 period. Tail dependence increases during 
periods of stress, but rare earths are receivers of spillovers for all of the 
periods studied. Song et al. (2021) employ time-varying parameter 
vector autoregression (TVP-VAR) to investigate the dynamic connect­
edness between rare earth stocks, clean energy stocks, world equities, 
base metals, crude oil, and gold. They find that the volatility connect­
edness and return vary over the sample period. The rare earths equities 
are mostly receivers of spillovers. Rare earth stocks have also exhibited a 
stronger connectedness with other assets during the COVID-19 period. 
Zheng et al. (2021) use Chinese company level data to study asymmetric 
spillovers and connectedness between rare earth markets and new en­
ergy. They find that there exists a risk transfer between renewable en­
ergy markets and rare earth markets and that the network structure of 
risk transfers changes between firms across time. 
Several different methods have been used to forecast metal prices. 
Some representative examples include the following. Dooley and Leni­
han (2005) find that ARIMA has slightly higher accuracy than lagged 
forward models when predicting lead and zinc prices. Chen et al. (2010) 
find that the exchange rates of major commodity producing countries 
are good predictors of metal prices. Kriechbaumer et al. (2014) combine 
wavelets with ARIMA to forecast the prices of aluminum, copper, lead, 
and zinc. Wavelet multiresolution helps to increase the predictive ac­
curacy of the ARIMA models. He et al. (2015) find that a Curvelet 
forecasting algorithm has higher metal price prediction accuracy than a 
benchmark model. Chen et al. (2016) find that for forecasting aluminum 
and nickel prices, a gray wave forecasting model outperforms an ARIMA 
model. Fernandez (2017b) finds that the information content of futures 
prices is somewhat limited for forecasting industrial metals prices. 
Pincheira Brown and Hardy (2019) find that the Chilean exchange rate 
has the ability to predict six base metals (aluminum, copper, lead, 
nickel, tin, and zinc) that trade on the London Metal Exchange. For 
forecasting aluminum, copper, lead, nickel and zinc prices, Fernandez 
(2020) finds that the convenience yield and detrended oil price have 
higher predictive power than interest rates and exchange rates for one to 
twelve month out-of-sample forecasts. Rubaszek et al. (2020) find that 
while mean reverting models outperform a random walk for forecasting 
aluminum, copper, nickel, and zinc adding a threshold structure does 
not increase forecasting performance. Kwas et al. (2021) use dynamic 
factor models, vector autoregression (VAR), and a random walk to 
forecast the real prices of aluminum, copper, nickel and zinc. They find 
that for aluminum, nickel and zinc VAR models outperform the random 
walk and dynamic factor models. 
There is a developing literature that uses machine learning to fore­
cast metal prices. S´anchez Lasheras et al. (2015) find that neural net­
works outperform ARIMA models when forecasting COMEX copper spot 
prices. Liu et al. (2017) find that decision trees produce high accuracy 
for predicting copper prices. Building on the work of Liu et al. (2017), 
Díaz et al. (2020) forecast copper prices using decision trees, random 
forests, and gradient boosting. The random walk model, however, offers 
comparable forecast accuracy. Khoshalan et al. (2021) found that 
compared to gene expression programming, adaptive neo-fuzzy infer­
ence system, and ant colony optimization, ANN is better able to predict 
copper prices. Zhang et al. (2021) use multi-layer perception (MLP) 
neural network, k-nearest neighbors (KNN), support vector machine, 
gradient boosting tree (GBT) and random forest to predict monthly 
copper prices. They find that MLP has the highest accuracy. Shi et al. 
(2023) use LSTM-GRU and LSTM-CNN models to forecast daily metal 
prices. They find that these methods outperform particle swarm opti­
mization and the genetic algorithm. This discussion on forecasting 
methods for metal prices indicates that, overall, nonlinear methods have 
higher prediction accuracy. 
Our literature review suggests that there is a knowledge gap with 
respect to forecasting rare earth stock prices. The next section of the 
paper describes the methods used for predicting rare earth stock prices. 
3. Methods 
The following methods are employed to predict the direction of rare 
earth stock prices. 
3.1. Naïve Bayes 
The Naïve Bayes classifier is used to model and forecast a binary 
response variable (James et al., 2022). Here the direction of stock price 
changes can be classified as a binary variable. Positive stock price 
changes from one period to another are classified as up. Non-positive 
stock price changes from one period to another are classified as down. 
The Naïve Bayes classifier uses Bayes theorem to make predictions. 
Naïve Bayes models are easy to estimate and are o